---
title: Insert title here
key: 837d120fc1f78e8601d7a6765e6a5e43

---
## Type Hinting

```yaml
type: "TitleSlide"
key: "c73d9ed4a1"
```

`@lower_third`

name: Shayne Miel
title: Machine Learning Researcher


`@script`
Welcome to the final chapter of "Writing Functions in Python". In these lessons you are going to learn about a new language feature that was added in Python 3 - type hinting. Let's get started!


---
## Dynamic vs. Static Languages

```yaml
type: "TwoColumns"
key: "c35adf5d3d"
center_content: false
```

`@part1`
**Dynamically Typed**

- Python
- R
- Ruby
- JavaScript
- PHP
- Lua


`@part2`
**Statically Typed**

- C/C++
- Java
- Scala
- Fortran
- Rust
- Go


`@script`
Programming languages can mostly be split into two categories: dynamically typed languages and statically typed languages. Python and R, languages that are used heavily in data science, are both examples of dynamic languages, while C and Java are examples of statically typed languages.


---
## Dynamic vs. Static Languages

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "f1eebf3a41"
```

`@part1`
Variables and functions in C/C++{{1}}
```
int foo = 5;
int add(int x, int y) 
{
    return x + y
}
```{{1}}

Variables and functions in Python{{2}}
```
foo = 5
def add(x, y):
    return x + y
```{{2}}


`@script`
The most noticeable difference between these two kinds of languages is that statically typed languages require that you indicate what _kind_ of variables and function arguments you're using in the code, as in this C example.

Dynamic languages, on the other hand, will figure out the types of the variables at runtime, and you don't have to explicitly declare what they are.


---
## Advantages of a Dynamic Language

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "bcc2046f2e"
center_content: false
```

`@part1`
```
In [1]: def add(a, b):
   ...:     return a + b
```
```
In [2]: add(4, 2)
Out[2]: 6
```{{1}}
```
In [3]: add(21.7, 20.3)
Out[3]: 42.0
```{{2}}
```
In [4]: add('python', ' rules')
Out[4]: 'python rules'
```{{3}}
```
In [5]: add([1, 2, 3], ['a', 'b', 'c'])
Out[5]: [1, 2, 3, 'a', 'b', 'c']
```{{4}}


`@script`
Having the interpreter infer the type of the variable at runtime makes the code more concise. It also makes it more flexible. For instance, if we define this simple add function, we can send it integers, floats, strings, or even lists.


---
## Disadvantages of a Dynamic Language

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "a7073a5748"
```

`@part1`
```
In [1]: def add(a, b):
   ...:     return a + b
```

```
In [13]: x = 5
```{{1}}

```
In [47]: y = 'python rules'
```{{2}}

```
In [48]: add(x, y)
```{{3}}
```
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
TypeError                                 Traceback (most recent call last)
<ipython-input-15-066c1be38f29> in <module>
----> 1 add(x, y)

<ipython-input-1-b2d6d05c6b17> in add(a, b)
      1 def add(a, b):
----> 2     return a + b
      3

TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for +: 'int' and 'str'
```{{4}}


`@script`
But that flexibility comes with some amount of danger. Let's say you have that same add function.

Then you set x equal to 5 and y equal to the string "python rules". 

What's going to happen when we try to add x and y?

Ack, Type Error. Python doesn't know how to apply the plus operator to an integer and a string. It doesn't even make sense. In a statically typed language, you would have caught this error when you tried to compile the code. In a dynamic language like Python, you don't know it will cause an error until it raises the error at runtime.

This is generally not a problem while you're doing research - you can just go fix it. But when you are ready to turn it into something that will be running in production, you need to know about these kinds of issues in advance.


---
## Solution: Type Hints!

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "0ca9c8e404"
```

`@part1`
We want:
- Flexibility of dynamic typing
- Security of static typing

Add annotations:{{1}}

```
In [1]: def add(a: int, b: int) -> int:
   ...:     return a + b
```{{1}}


`@script`
How do we get the flexibility of a dynamically typed language, with the security of a statically typed language?

Well, if you're using Python 3, you can add annotations to your functions that hint at the types of the arguments.


---
## What Do Type Hints Do?

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "461f680831"
```

`@part1`
```
In [1]: def add(a: int, b: int) -> int:
   ...:     return a + b
   ...:
```
```
In [2]: add(4, 2)
Out[2]: 6
```{{1}}
```
In [3]: add('python', ' rules')
Out[3]: 'python rules'
```{{1}}
```
In [4]: add.__annotations__
Out[4]: {'a': int, 'b': int, 'return': int}
```{{2}}


`@script`
Now that we've added type hints, let's rerun our example.

We can add two integers like normal.
But wait, why can we add those strings?

That's because Python is _still_ a dynamically typed language. The type hints don't change that.

However, the type hints have changed one thing. They've added some new metadata to the function. That's useful because we can now write a program that goes through our code and does the type checking for us, as we'll see later in this chapter.


---
## PEP 484

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "7bfde77792"
center_content: true
```

`@part1`
https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0484/


`@script`
In the next lesson, we'll dive deeper into type hints. But in the meantime, you can find more details in PEP 484. 

PEPs, or Python Enhancement Proposals, are how Python evolves. A PEP is essentially a design document for some change that should happen to the Python language. Anyone in the Python community can propose a new PEP, even you! There is even a PEP that describes how PEPs should be submitted and how they get approved.

PEP 484 describes the syntax and meaning behind these annotations and goes into quite a bit of detail about them.


---
## Let's Try It Out!

```yaml
type: "FinalSlide"
key: "3a21bcb9fe"
```

`@script`
Now let's try a few exercises to get you used to adding type hints to your function definitions.

